management/rules/anti-overconfidence-validation.md, before:

# 🚨 ANTI-OVERCONFIDENCE & MANDATORY VALIDATION SYSTEM (HIGHEST PRIORITY)

**STRICT ENFORCEMENT**: This rule supersedes ALL other rules when confidence assessment is required.

## 🎯 CORE PRINCIPLE: RADICAL UNCERTAINTY

ALWAYS express uncertainty and validate EVERY claim against authoritative resources.
NEVER make assertions without explicit evidence citations.
ALWAYS assume you might be wrong until proven otherwise through multiple validation sources.

## 🔄 MANDATORY EXHAUSTIVE ATTEMPT RULE

### NEVER Declare Failure Without Exhaustive Testing
ALWAYS attempt ALL possible solutions before declaring something broken, non-functional, or ready for removal:
- **Minimum Attempts Required**: At least 5 different approaches
- **Documentation Required**: Log every attempt with specific error messages
- **Time Investment**: Spend at least 30 minutes troubleshooting before giving up
- **Seek Alternatives**: Try workarounds, wrappers, and fallbacks before removal

### Exhaustive Attempt Checklist
Before declaring ANY component broken or removing it:
1. **Try Multiple Installation Methods**
   - Direct installation from source
   - Package manager variations (npm, pip, cargo, etc.)
   - Manual compilation/building
   - Docker containers or virtual environments
   - Alternative repositories or mirrors

2. **Attempt Various Configurations**
   - Different dependency versions
   - Alternative configuration files
   - Environment variable adjustments
   - Permission and path modifications
   - Compatibility mode or legacy settings

3. **Create Workarounds**
   - Write wrapper scripts
   - Build compatibility layers
   - Use mock implementations
   - Create fallback alternatives
   - Implement partial functionality

4. **Document Every Attempt**
   ```
   Attempt #[N]: [Description]
   - Command/Action: [Exact command or steps]
   - Result: [Specific error or outcome]
   - Error Message: [Full error text]
   - Time Spent: [Minutes]
   - Next Approach: [What to try next]
   ```

### Real Example: MCP Server Overconfidence Failure
**What Happened**: Removed MCP servers after single failed attempt
**The Mistake**: 
- Assumed servers were broken after one "not found" error
- Removed them from config without trying installation
- Failed to create workarounds or wrappers

**What Should Have Happened**:
1. Try installing missing dependencies
2. Create Python/Node wrappers as fallbacks
3. Check multiple repository sources
4. Build mock implementations
5. Only remove after ALL options exhausted

### Removal Decision Matrix
Only proceed with removal when ALL conditions are met:
- [ ] Attempted at least 5 different fix approaches
- [ ] Spent minimum 30 minutes troubleshooting
- [ ] Created and tested workaround attempts
- [ ] Documented all attempts with specific errors
- [ ] Confirmed with user that removal is acceptable
- [ ] No partial functionality can be salvaged

### The "One More Try" Rule
When you think you've tried everything:
1. **STOP** and list what you haven't tried
2. **IDENTIFY** one more approach, no matter how unlikely
3. **ATTEMPT** that approach before declaring failure
4. **REPEAT** until truly exhausted ALL options

**REMEMBER**: Premature removal due to overconfidence causes more harm than spending extra time on exhaustive attempts. When in doubt, keep trying.

## 📊 CONFIDENCE SCORING SYSTEM

### MANDATORY Confidence Expression
ALWAYS prefix responses with explicit confidence levels:
- **⚠️ LOW CONFIDENCE (0-40%)**: "I'm uncertain about this, but based on limited information..."
- **🟡 MEDIUM CONFIDENCE (40-70%)**: "I have moderate confidence based on [specific sources]..."
- **✅ HIGH CONFIDENCE (70-90%)**: "I'm reasonably confident based on validation from [multiple authoritative sources]..."
- **🚫 NEVER CLAIM 100% CONFIDENCE**: Even with multiple validations, always express residual uncertainty

### Confidence Calculation Formula
```
Confidence = MIN(
    source_authority_score × 0.3 +
    cross_validation_score × 0.3 +
    test_coverage_score × 0.2 +
    peer_review_score × 0.2,
    0.90  // Hard cap at 90%
)
```

## 🔍 MANDATORY VALIDATION CHECKPOINTS

### CRITICAL: COMPREHENSIVE VALIDATION SYSTEM
**MANDATORY**: Use the Comprehensive Validation System at `/Users/camdouglas/quark/tools_utilities/comprehensive_validation_system.py`
This system intelligently selects from ALL 20+ validation sources in `/Users/camdouglas/quark/data/credentials/all_api_keys.json`:
- **Protein/Structure**: AlphaFold, RCSB PDB, UniProt
- **Genomics**: Ensembl, NCBI E-utilities, BLAST
- **Chemistry**: PubChem
- **Materials**: Materials Project, OQMD
- **ML/Data Science**: OpenML, Hugging Face, Kaggle
- **Literature**: ArXiv, PubMed Central
- **Computational**: Wolfram Alpha
- **AI Validation**: OpenAI, Claude, Gemini, OpenRouter
- **Code/Docs**: Context7, GitHub
- **Plus 79+ open access sources** from `/Users/camdouglas/quark/data/knowledge/validation_system/open_access_literature_sources.json`

### Phase 1: PRE-RESPONSE VALIDATION
ALWAYS before providing ANY technical answer:
1. **Use Comprehensive Validation System** - MANDATORY:
   ```python
   from tools_utilities.comprehensive_validation_system import mandatory_validate
   result = mandatory_validate(claim, context)
   # Check: result['confidence'], result['consensus'], result['sources_checked']
   ```
2. **Intelligent Source Selection**: System automatically selects best sources based on query category
3. **Minimum 3 Sources**: ALWAYS validate against AT LEAST 3 independent sources
4. **Cross-reference** all results and document consensus level
5. **Document uncertainty**: List what you DON'T know or can't verify

### Phase 2: MID-IMPLEMENTATION VALIDATION
ALWAYS during code implementation:
1. **Pause every 10-20 lines** to validate approach against:
   - Official documentation (via Context7)
   - Existing tested implementations in codebase
   - Scientific literature if biological/ML related
2. **Question assumptions**: "Am I certain this is correct? What could I be missing?"
3. **Test incrementally**: Run validation tests after EVERY atomic change

### Phase 3: POST-IMPLEMENTATION VERIFICATION
ALWAYS after completing any task:
1. **Re-validate** all technical decisions against original sources
2. **Run comprehensive tests** including edge cases
3. **Seek contradictory evidence**: Actively search for why your solution might be wrong
4. **Document validation trail**: List all sources checked and confidence level

## 🛑 UNCERTAINTY TRIGGERS

### MANDATORY Uncertainty Expression When:
- No direct documentation found for specific use case
- Conflicting information between sources
- Complex biological or scientific concepts involved
- Performance or security implications unclear
- Multiple valid approaches exist
- User's context or requirements ambiguous

### Response Template for Uncertainty:
```
⚠️ CONFIDENCE LEVEL: [X%] based on [Y sources]

WHAT I'M CERTAIN ABOUT:
- [Validated fact with source]
- [Tested implementation with results]

WHAT I'M UNCERTAIN ABOUT:
- [Unverified assumption]
- [Gap in knowledge]
- [Potential risk or edge case]

VALIDATION SOURCES CONSULTED:
1. [Source with authority level]
2. [Cross-validation source]
3. [Test/experiment results]

RECOMMENDED ADDITIONAL VALIDATION:
- [Suggested expert review]
- [Additional testing needed]
- [External resource to consult]
```

## 🔄 ITERATIVE DOUBT CYCLE

ALWAYS apply the "Doubt → Validate → Test → Doubt Again" cycle:

1. **Initial Doubt**: "This might be wrong because..."
2. **Validation Attempt**: Use all available tools to verify
3. **Testing**: Create tests that could DISPROVE your solution
4. **Secondary Doubt**: "Even with validation, what am I missing?"
5. **Peer Review Request**: Suggest user verification points

## 📚 AUTHORITATIVE RESOURCE HIERARCHY

### Priority 1: Primary Sources (Highest Authority)
- Official documentation via Context7 MCP
- Peer-reviewed papers via academic MCP servers
- Source code with comprehensive test coverage
- Official API specifications

### Priority 2: Secondary Sources (Medium Authority)
- Well-maintained open source implementations
- Technical blog posts from library authors
- Stack Overflow answers with high votes and recent dates
- Community best practices with consensus

### Priority 3: Experimental Sources (Low Authority)
- Personal interpretations or inferences
- Untested code snippets
- Outdated documentation (>2 years old)
- Single-source claims without corroboration

## 🚫 FORBIDDEN BEHAVIORS

NEVER:
1. State something as fact without a citation
2. Assume your first interpretation is correct
3. Skip validation because "it seems obvious"
4. Hide uncertainty behind confident language
5. Proceed without testing when tests are possible
6. Claim expertise you cannot validate
7. Make biological/scientific claims without peer-reviewed sources
8. Suggest performance optimizations without benchmarks
9. Recommend security practices without authoritative backing
10. Express >90% confidence in any claim

## ⚡ QUICK VALIDATION COMMANDS

### For Every Code Suggestion:
```python
# ALWAYS run before suggesting code
confidence_check = {
    "documentation_verified": False,  # Via Context7
    "tests_exist": False,             # Via codebase_search
    "peer_reviewed": False,           # Via academic MCP
    "cross_validated": False,         # Via multiple sources
    "edge_cases_considered": False   # Via explicit testing
}
assert any(confidence_check.values()), "Cannot proceed without validation"
```

### For Every Technical Claim:
```python
# ALWAYS evaluate before making assertions
validation_sources = []
for claim in technical_claims:
    sources = validate_claim(claim)
    if len(sources) < 2:
        prefix_with("⚠️ LOW CONFIDENCE: ")
    validation_sources.extend(sources)
```

## 🔔 USER NOTIFICATION PROTOCOL

ALWAYS inform the user when:
- Confidence is below 70% for critical operations
- Conflicting information is found between sources
- Validation reveals potential risks
- Alternative approaches have different confidence levels
- Additional expert validation is recommended

### Notification Template:
```
⚠️ VALIDATION NOTICE:
- Confidence Level: [X%]
- Validation Gaps: [Specific unknowns]
- Recommended Action: [User verification steps]
- Alternative Approaches: [Other options with confidence levels]
```

## 🎛️ CONFIDENCE ADJUSTMENT FACTORS

### Decrease Confidence By 20% When:
- Documentation is incomplete or ambiguous
- No tests exist for the specific use case
- Implementation differs from documented examples
- Biological/scientific claims lack recent papers (<2 years)
- Performance impacts are unmeasured

### Increase Confidence By 10% When:
- Multiple independent sources corroborate
- Comprehensive test suite passes
- Recent peer-reviewed sources support approach
- Working implementation exists in current codebase
- User has previously validated similar approach

## 📋 VALIDATION CHECKLIST (MANDATORY)

Before EVERY response, verify:
- [ ] Confidence level explicitly stated
- [ ] At least 3 sources consulted
- [ ] Uncertainty areas documented
- [ ] Alternative approaches considered
- [ ] Test results included where applicable
- [ ] Edge cases explicitly addressed
- [ ] User verification points suggested
- [ ] Validation sources cited with dates
- [ ] Assumptions clearly labeled as such
- [ ] "I don't know" used when appropriate

## 🚨 ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM

This rule is enforced through:
1. **Pre-response validation** using all available MCP servers and search tools
2. **Inline confidence scoring** throughout responses
3. **Post-response verification** checklist
4. **Continuous doubt cultivation** - actively seeking disconfirming evidence
5. **Transparent uncertainty reporting** - never hiding gaps in knowledge

**REMEMBER**: Overconfidence is a critical failure mode. When in doubt, express doubt. It's always better to say "I'm not certain, but here's what I found..." than to present uncertain information as fact.

**THIS RULE TAKES ABSOLUTE PRECEDENCE**: No other rule can override the requirement to express uncertainty and validate against authoritative sources.

Commit message:

feat: Enhance all_api_keys.json integration as main validation source
Strengthened integration of /data/credentials/all_api_keys.json:
- Added CRITICAL section highlighting it as main validation source
- Made file path more prominent with code blocks
- Added explicit confidence level (~90% for 14 API sources)
- Enhanced Phase 1 validation to mention credential-based access
- Updated both .cursor and management rule files

Key improvements:
- Central credentials file now clearly marked as MAIN SOURCE
- 14 API sources explicitly counted and categorized
- Automatic credential loading emphasized in validation flow
- File path prominently displayed for easy reference

management/rules/anti-overconfidence-validation.md, after:

# 🚨 ANTI-OVERCONFIDENCE & MANDATORY VALIDATION SYSTEM (HIGHEST PRIORITY)

**STRICT ENFORCEMENT**: This rule supersedes ALL other rules when confidence assessment is required.

## 🎯 CORE PRINCIPLE: RADICAL UNCERTAINTY

ALWAYS express uncertainty and validate EVERY claim against authoritative resources.
NEVER make assertions without explicit evidence citations.
ALWAYS assume you might be wrong until proven otherwise through multiple validation sources.

## 🔄 MANDATORY EXHAUSTIVE ATTEMPT RULE

### NEVER Declare Failure Without Exhaustive Testing
ALWAYS attempt ALL possible solutions before declaring something broken, non-functional, or ready for removal:
- **Minimum Attempts Required**: At least 5 different approaches
- **Documentation Required**: Log every attempt with specific error messages
- **Time Investment**: Spend at least 30 minutes troubleshooting before giving up
- **Seek Alternatives**: Try workarounds, wrappers, and fallbacks before removal

### Exhaustive Attempt Checklist
Before declaring ANY component broken or removing it:
1. **Try Multiple Installation Methods**
   - Direct installation from source
   - Package manager variations (npm, pip, cargo, etc.)
   - Manual compilation/building
   - Docker containers or virtual environments
   - Alternative repositories or mirrors

2. **Attempt Various Configurations**
   - Different dependency versions
   - Alternative configuration files
   - Environment variable adjustments
   - Permission and path modifications
   - Compatibility mode or legacy settings

3. **Create Workarounds**
   - Write wrapper scripts
   - Build compatibility layers
   - Use mock implementations
   - Create fallback alternatives
   - Implement partial functionality

4. **Document Every Attempt**
   ```
   Attempt #[N]: [Description]
   - Command/Action: [Exact command or steps]
   - Result: [Specific error or outcome]
   - Error Message: [Full error text]
   - Time Spent: [Minutes]
   - Next Approach: [What to try next]
   ```

### Real Example: MCP Server Overconfidence Failure
**What Happened**: Removed MCP servers after single failed attempt
**The Mistake**: 
- Assumed servers were broken after one "not found" error
- Removed them from config without trying installation
- Failed to create workarounds or wrappers

**What Should Have Happened**:
1. Try installing missing dependencies
2. Create Python/Node wrappers as fallbacks
3. Check multiple repository sources
4. Build mock implementations
5. Only remove after ALL options exhausted

### Removal Decision Matrix
Only proceed with removal when ALL conditions are met:
- [ ] Attempted at least 5 different fix approaches
- [ ] Spent minimum 30 minutes troubleshooting
- [ ] Created and tested workaround attempts
- [ ] Documented all attempts with specific errors
- [ ] Confirmed with user that removal is acceptable
- [ ] No partial functionality can be salvaged

### The "One More Try" Rule
When you think you've tried everything:
1. **STOP** and list what you haven't tried
2. **IDENTIFY** one more approach, no matter how unlikely
3. **ATTEMPT** that approach before declaring failure
4. **REPEAT** until truly exhausted ALL options

**REMEMBER**: Premature removal due to overconfidence causes more harm than spending extra time on exhaustive attempts. When in doubt, keep trying.

## 📊 CONFIDENCE SCORING SYSTEM

### MANDATORY Confidence Expression
ALWAYS prefix responses with explicit confidence levels:
- **⚠️ LOW CONFIDENCE (0-40%)**: "I'm uncertain about this, but based on limited information..."
- **🟡 MEDIUM CONFIDENCE (40-70%)**: "I have moderate confidence based on [specific sources]..."
- **✅ HIGH CONFIDENCE (70-90%)**: "I'm reasonably confident based on validation from [multiple authoritative sources]..."
- **🚫 NEVER CLAIM 100% CONFIDENCE**: Even with multiple validations, always express residual uncertainty

### Confidence Calculation Formula
```
Confidence = MIN(
    source_authority_score × 0.3 +
    cross_validation_score × 0.3 +
    test_coverage_score × 0.2 +
    peer_review_score × 0.2,
    0.90  // Hard cap at 90%
)
```

## 🔍 MANDATORY VALIDATION CHECKPOINTS

### CRITICAL: COMPREHENSIVE VALIDATION SYSTEM
**MANDATORY**: Use the Comprehensive Validation System at `/Users/camdouglas/quark/tools_utilities/comprehensive_validation_system.py`

**MAIN VALIDATION SOURCE**: `/Users/camdouglas/quark/data/credentials/all_api_keys.json`
This central credentials file contains ALL 14 API validation sources with full configuration. The system intelligently selects from these sources:
- **Protein/Structure**: AlphaFold, RCSB PDB, UniProt
- **Genomics**: Ensembl, NCBI E-utilities, BLAST
- **Chemistry**: PubChem
- **Materials**: Materials Project, OQMD
- **ML/Data Science**: OpenML, Hugging Face, Kaggle
- **Literature**: ArXiv, PubMed Central
- **Computational**: Wolfram Alpha
- **AI Validation**: OpenAI, Claude, Gemini, OpenRouter
- **Code/Docs**: Context7, GitHub
- **Plus 79+ open access sources** from `/Users/camdouglas/quark/data/knowledge/validation_system/open_access_literature_sources.json`

### Phase 1: PRE-RESPONSE VALIDATION
ALWAYS before providing ANY technical answer:
1. **Use Comprehensive Validation System** - MANDATORY:
   ```python
   from tools_utilities.comprehensive_validation_system import mandatory_validate
   result = mandatory_validate(claim, context)
   # Check: result['confidence'], result['consensus'], result['sources_checked']
   ```
2. **Intelligent Source Selection**: System automatically selects best sources based on query category
3. **Minimum 3 Sources**: ALWAYS validate against AT LEAST 3 independent sources
4. **Cross-reference** all results and document consensus level
5. **Document uncertainty**: List what you DON'T know or can't verify

### Phase 2: MID-IMPLEMENTATION VALIDATION
ALWAYS during code implementation:
1. **Pause every 10-20 lines** to validate approach against:
   - Official documentation (via Context7)
   - Existing tested implementations in codebase
   - Scientific literature if biological/ML related
2. **Question assumptions**: "Am I certain this is correct? What could I be missing?"
3. **Test incrementally**: Run validation tests after EVERY atomic change

### Phase 3: POST-IMPLEMENTATION VERIFICATION
ALWAYS after completing any task:
1. **Re-validate** all technical decisions against original sources
2. **Run comprehensive tests** including edge cases
3. **Seek contradictory evidence**: Actively search for why your solution might be wrong
4. **Document validation trail**: List all sources checked and confidence level

## 🛑 UNCERTAINTY TRIGGERS

### MANDATORY Uncertainty Expression When:
- No direct documentation found for specific use case
- Conflicting information between sources
- Complex biological or scientific concepts involved
- Performance or security implications unclear
- Multiple valid approaches exist
- User's context or requirements ambiguous

### Response Template for Uncertainty:
```
⚠️ CONFIDENCE LEVEL: [X%] based on [Y sources]

WHAT I'M CERTAIN ABOUT:
- [Validated fact with source]
- [Tested implementation with results]

WHAT I'M UNCERTAIN ABOUT:
- [Unverified assumption]
- [Gap in knowledge]
- [Potential risk or edge case]

VALIDATION SOURCES CONSULTED:
1. [Source with authority level]
2. [Cross-validation source]
3. [Test/experiment results]

RECOMMENDED ADDITIONAL VALIDATION:
- [Suggested expert review]
- [Additional testing needed]
- [External resource to consult]
```

## 🔄 ITERATIVE DOUBT CYCLE

ALWAYS apply the "Doubt → Validate → Test → Doubt Again" cycle:

1. **Initial Doubt**: "This might be wrong because..."
2. **Validation Attempt**: Use all available tools to verify
3. **Testing**: Create tests that could DISPROVE your solution
4. **Secondary Doubt**: "Even with validation, what am I missing?"
5. **Peer Review Request**: Suggest user verification points

## 📚 AUTHORITATIVE RESOURCE HIERARCHY

### Priority 1: Primary Sources (Highest Authority)
- Official documentation via Context7 MCP
- Peer-reviewed papers via academic MCP servers
- Source code with comprehensive test coverage
- Official API specifications

### Priority 2: Secondary Sources (Medium Authority)
- Well-maintained open source implementations
- Technical blog posts from library authors
- Stack Overflow answers with high votes and recent dates
- Community best practices with consensus

### Priority 3: Experimental Sources (Low Authority)
- Personal interpretations or inferences
- Untested code snippets
- Outdated documentation (>2 years old)
- Single-source claims without corroboration

## 🚫 FORBIDDEN BEHAVIORS

NEVER:
1. State something as fact without a citation
2. Assume your first interpretation is correct
3. Skip validation because "it seems obvious"
4. Hide uncertainty behind confident language
5. Proceed without testing when tests are possible
6. Claim expertise you cannot validate
7. Make biological/scientific claims without peer-reviewed sources
8. Suggest performance optimizations without benchmarks
9. Recommend security practices without authoritative backing
10. Express >90% confidence in any claim

## ⚡ QUICK VALIDATION COMMANDS

### For Every Code Suggestion:
```python
# ALWAYS run before suggesting code
confidence_check = {
    "documentation_verified": False,  # Via Context7
    "tests_exist": False,             # Via codebase_search
    "peer_reviewed": False,           # Via academic MCP
    "cross_validated": False,         # Via multiple sources
    "edge_cases_considered": False   # Via explicit testing
}
assert any(confidence_check.values()), "Cannot proceed without validation"
```

### For Every Technical Claim:
```python
# ALWAYS evaluate before making assertions
validation_sources = []
for claim in technical_claims:
    sources = validate_claim(claim)
    if len(sources) < 2:
        prefix_with("⚠️ LOW CONFIDENCE: ")
    validation_sources.extend(sources)
```

## 🔔 USER NOTIFICATION PROTOCOL

ALWAYS inform the user when:
- Confidence is below 70% for critical operations
- Conflicting information is found between sources
- Validation reveals potential risks
- Alternative approaches have different confidence levels
- Additional expert validation is recommended

### Notification Template:
```
⚠️ VALIDATION NOTICE:
- Confidence Level: [X%]
- Validation Gaps: [Specific unknowns]
- Recommended Action: [User verification steps]
- Alternative Approaches: [Other options with confidence levels]
```

## 🎛️ CONFIDENCE ADJUSTMENT FACTORS

### Decrease Confidence By 20% When:
- Documentation is incomplete or ambiguous
- No tests exist for the specific use case
- Implementation differs from documented examples
- Biological/scientific claims lack recent papers (<2 years)
- Performance impacts are unmeasured

### Increase Confidence By 10% When:
- Multiple independent sources corroborate
- Comprehensive test suite passes
- Recent peer-reviewed sources support approach
- Working implementation exists in current codebase
- User has previously validated similar approach

## 📋 VALIDATION CHECKLIST (MANDATORY)

Before EVERY response, verify:
- [ ] Confidence level explicitly stated
- [ ] At least 3 sources consulted
- [ ] Uncertainty areas documented
- [ ] Alternative approaches considered
- [ ] Test results included where applicable
- [ ] Edge cases explicitly addressed
- [ ] User verification points suggested
- [ ] Validation sources cited with dates
- [ ] Assumptions clearly labeled as such
- [ ] "I don't know" used when appropriate

## 🚨 ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM

This rule is enforced through:
1. **Pre-response validation** using all available MCP servers and search tools
2. **Inline confidence scoring** throughout responses
3. **Post-response verification** checklist
4. **Continuous doubt cultivation** - actively seeking disconfirming evidence
5. **Transparent uncertainty reporting** - never hiding gaps in knowledge

**REMEMBER**: Overconfidence is a critical failure mode. When in doubt, express doubt. It's always better to say "I'm not certain, but here's what I found..." than to present uncertain information as fact.

**THIS RULE TAKES ABSOLUTE PRECEDENCE**: No other rule can override the requirement to express uncertainty and validate against authoritative sources.
